---
layout: post
date: 2024-03-19
title: Session 3 - Christos Lisgaras, PhD - Alzheimer's disease and epilepsy - Commonalities, differences and lessons learned
author: NeuroDialogue
subtitle:  AD and Epilepsy
image: 
  path: /assets/posters/session_3.png
---

<h2> Please provide a brief summary of your research:</h2>
Currently, my work focuses on developing novel approaches to treat abnormal electrical activity and memory impairments in epilepsy and Alzheimer’s disease. To that end, I use multielectrode arrays in animal models to map abnormal electrical activity in their brains with the goal of selectively disrupting it. To selectively disrupt abnormal electrical activity, I developed novel neurostimulation protocols to target not only seizures but also epileptiform activity in between seizures such as interictal spikes and high frequency oscillations (HFOs). 

Using this selective approach, I was able to demonstrate a novel role of hippocampal area CA2 in controlling social memory impairments, seizures, interictal spikes, and HFOs in two clinically relevant animal models of epilepsy. I also am highly interested in Alzheimer’s disease where I found that HFOs are a new abnormal electrical activity that emerges extremely early during disease progression. My most recent work sheds light on the dominant role of the dentate gyrus during interictal spikes in three mouse lines that simulate aspects of Alzheimer’s disease and their cholinergic facilitation by basal forebrain cholinergic neurons.

<h2> Please provide 1-3 reference articles related to your research and talk: </h2>
1. Lisgaras CP, Scharfman HE. Interictal spikes in Alzheimer's disease: Preclinical evidence for dominance of the dentate gyrus and cholinergic control by the medial septum. Neurobiol Dis. 2023 Oct 15;187:106294. doi: 10.1016/j.nbd.2023.106294. Epub 2023 Sep 14. PMID: 37714307; PMCID: PMC10617404.

2. Lisgaras CP, Scharfman HE. High-frequency oscillations (250-500 Hz) in animal models of Alzheimer's disease and two animal models of epilepsy. Epilepsia. 2023 Jan;64(1):231-246. doi: 10.1111/epi.17462. Epub 2022 Nov 29. PMID: 36346209; PMCID: PMC10501735.

3. Lisgaras CP, Scharfman HE. Robust chronic convulsive seizures, high frequency oscillations, and human seizure onset patterns in an intrahippocampal kainic acid model in mice. Neurobiol Dis. 2022 May;166:105637. doi: 10.1016/j.nbd.2022.105637. Epub 2022 Jan 26. PMID: 35091040; PMCID: PMC9034729.

<h2> In your view, how will your research impact patients and clinical practice? </h2>
Our work could aid in identifying new ways to diagnose Azheimer's disease as early as possible while also offering the opportunity to develop new and improved therapeutic strategies in epilepsy, especially for patient populations that lack a response to treatment or suffer debilitating side effects.

