---
layout: post
date: 2024-05-03
title: Session 4 - Alicia Northal, PhD - Multimodal imaging of the human motor cortex in ALS patients
author: NeuroDialogue
subtitle:  Imaging of ALS
image: 
  path: /assets/posters/session_4.jpg
---

<h2> Please provide a brief summary of your research:</h2>
The primary motor cortex (M1) is responsible for voluntary motor control in humans. M1 has a complex architecture with local variations in microstructure according to three dimensions: two across the cortical surface and one with cortical depth. Given that standard MRI lacks the resolution needed to characterise cortical depth, the microstructural organisation of M1 remains unclear, in addition to the precise mechanisms of aging and disease in M1. An example of a relevant disease is amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS), which is characterised by the loss of Betz cells in the output layer 5 of M1 based on post-mortem studies. ALS is a rapidly progressing neurodegenerative disease resulting in the loss of motor function with a typical survival of two years from diagnosis. 

Recent advances in 7-Tesla MRI (7T-MRI) provide the sub-millimetre resolution for investigating the living brain at the level of cortical layers. This methodological leap supports ‘in-vivo histology’ that allows us to characterise earlier pathology than previously possible. My research aimed to employ such methods to characterise the microarchitecture of M1 in ALS, as well as in healthy younger and older adults. The findings of my work support novel models of healthy and aging M1 microarchitecture and have clinical implications for ALS and beyond.

<h2> Please provide 1-3 reference articles related to your research and talk: </h2>
1.	Northall, A., Doehler, J., Weber, M., Tellez, I., Petri, S., Prudlo, J., ... & Kuehn, E. (2024). Multimodal layer modelling reveals in vivo pathology in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. Brain, 147(3), 1087.
2.	Northall, A., Doehler, J., Weber, M., Vielhaber, S., Schreiber, S., & Kuehn, E. (2023). Layer-specific vulnerability is a mechanism of topographic map aging. Neurobiology of Aging, 128, 17-32.
3.	Northall, A., Mukhopadhyay, B., Weber, M., Petri, S., Prudlo, J., Vielhaber, S., ... & Kuehn, E. (2022). An automated tongue tracker for quantifying bulbar function in ALS. Frontiers in Neurology, 13, 838191.

<h2> In your view, how will your research impact patients and clinical practice? </h2>
This work could provide early biomarkers of ALS pathology while also moving towards a future of personalised medicine by predicting topographic disease spread. In addition, the cortical layer modelling approach encourages further research into the microstructural mechanisms of other neurodegenerative diseases. 
