---
layout: post
date: 2024-01-12
title: Session 1 - Chris Dulla's Lab - Traumatic brain injury disrupts state-dependent functional cortical connectivity in a mouse model
author: NeuroDialogue
subtitle: Traumatic brain injury disrupts state-dependent functional cortical connectivity in a mouse model
image:
  path: /assets/posters/session_1.png
---

<h2> Please provide a brief summary of your research:</h2>
TBI can cause cognitive and motor dysfunction and disruptions in functional connectivity between brain regions. In human TBI patients and rodent models of TBI, functional connectivity is decreased after injury. Recovery of connectivity after TBI is associated with improved cognition and memory, suggesting an important link between connectivity and functional outcome. We examined widespread alterations in functional connectivity following TBI using simultaneous widefield mesoscale GCaMP7c calcium imaging and electrocorticography (ECoG) in mice injured using the controlled cortical impact (CCI) model of TBI. CCI profoundly disrupts functional connectivity immediately after injury, followed by partial recovery over 3 weeks. Examining discrete periods of locomotion and stillness reveals that CCI alters functional connectivity and reduces ECoG power in the theta band only during periods of behavioral stillness. Together, these findings demonstrate that TBI impairs the ability for the cortex to switch states across different behaviors and could add to how we assess patients after TBI.

<h2>Please provide 1-3 reference articles related to your research:</h2>
  1. Preprint of our initial findings: https://www.biorxiv.org/content/10.1101/2023.10.06.560776v1
  2. fMRI functional connectivity in humans is associated with performance on neuropsychological testing after TBI: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4909322/
  3. Thorough discussion of mesoscale imaging: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC10661869/

<h2>In your view, how will your research impact patients and clinical practice in the future:</h2>
I'm interested in leveraging multiple data streams to develop biomarkers of post-traumatic epilepsy (PTE) and certain deficits following TBI. I'm also interested in building on concepts of therapeutic ketosis to treat PTE by evaluating the effects of a glycolytic inhibitor following TBI on the ability to improve recovery and reduce development of PTE. On the clinical side, I'm interested in studying Post-Intensive Care Syndrome (PICS) or the constellation of symptoms patients experience following a prolonged stay in the ICU.

